Dheeraj's GSoC blog (#5440)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2022/10/2022-10-10-plugin-health-scoring-system-report.adoc

* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 2: Demo and Presentation

video::fM2SMbppRxw[youtube,width=800,height=420,start=342]

* A BIG shoutout to my mentor link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/authors/jleon/[Jake Leon], for devoting his time to coaching me so well for both of these presentations.

---

== Next Steps

- Add more probes to the project.
- Generate the plugin health scores based on the data extracted by the probes.
- Deploy the health scores via a JSON file, similar to how Jenkins Update Center does it.
- Render the detailed report of the health score of each plugin by fetching the JSON data generated above.
- [Stretch Goal] Display Plugin health score on Plugin Manager.

---

== Useful Links

- link:https://plugin-health.jenkins.io[plugin-health.jenkins.io]
- link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring[GitHub repository]
- link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Dxyli1LPlHdFxLoE9zFtr_3bTjnwQDMZGCxcGS79Z_I/edit[Architecture Diagram]
- link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HTbcWh5C1KrCgEzgqeVEPyfr1H5fH5eTj8KpbWrWsSY/edit#heading=h.efprktbggbop[GSoC Proposal Document]

> - Use the link:https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/GSoC-Plugin_Health_Score[Gitter channel] or link:https://community.jenkins.io[community.jenkins.io] in case you have any question(s) or feedback.

Author: I've attached the link to the Gitter channel (https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/GSoC-Plugin_Health_Score) here, so that interested contributors can use it to ask their questions there. As you can see in the channel, we are planning to create a new channel for this project whose context is not just limited to GSoC.

I can create a new PR in the future that updates this link to point to the new channel (if needed) or we'll post the new channel's link in this current channel, just like a redirect for the visitors). If you have any concerns about this, please let me know.

---
:layout: post
:title: "Plugin Health Scoring System"
:tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2022
- healthscore
- probes
- plugins
:author: dheerajodha
:sig: gsoc
description: >
  The Plugin Health Scoring System is a Google Summer of Code 2022 project.
opengraph:
  image: /images/gsoc/2022/plugin-health-score/introducing-the-plugin-health-scoring-system.png
links:
  gitter: https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/GSoC-Plugin_Health_Score
---

image::/images/gsoc/2022/plugin-health-score/introducing-the-plugin-health-scoring-system.png[GSoC, height=400, role=center, float=center]

The goal of this blog is to showcase the work done during the Google Summer of Code 2022 coding phases.
For a detailed description of the project, please see the link:/projects/gsoc/2022/projects/plugin-health-scoring-system/[project page].

---

== Overview

. <<About Project>>
. <<Architecture Diagram>>
. <<Phase 1>>
. <<Phase 2>>
. <<Next Steps>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

---

== About Project

> Plugin maintenance is an extremely important phase of a plugin’s lifecycle. Jenkins has always been active in ongoing developments which raises a need for thousands of plugins to catch up with their latest developments, to stay useful for a broader set of users.
> 
> We aim to fulfill this need by introducing a metric system to calculate the health score of Jenkins plugins. This health score measures the plugin’s development maturity level with the help of accurate numeric figures. This score attempts to provide an accurate picture of how much care and help a plugin needs and makes it easier for contributors to contribute. This score also allows users to make a conscious decision before installing and/or using a plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugin maintenance is an extremely important phase of a plugin’s lifecycle.
Jenkins is constantly developing, which raises a need for thousands of plugins to catch up with the latest developments. 
This allows them to stay useful for a broader set of users.

We aim to fulfill this need, by introducing a metric system to calculate the health score of Jenkins plugins. 
This health score measures the plugin’s development maturity level with the help of accurate numeric figures. 
This score attempts to provide an accurate picture of how much care and help a plugin needs, and makes it easier for contributors to contribute.
This score also allows users to make a conscious decision before installing or using a plugin.
```
The formatting/line structure suggestion is the same as above, and the wording suggestions are optional, but please let me know if you have any questions on that!

Author: Thanks for offering the reformatting and suggestions on the wording, looks great!

Reviewer: Of course, happy to help @dheerajodha!

There were two coding phases in the GSoC 2022.

---

== Architecture Diagram

image::/images/gsoc/2022/plugin-health-score/architecture-diagram.png[Architecture Diagram, height=690, role=center, float=center]

---

== Phase 1

> In this phase, we worked on setting up the project and followed best practices while doing so. The whole application is dockerized so that it is easier for anyone to spin up this project and test it out locally. There's continuous integration (CI) in place for the project to make sure that new changes are tested automatically. The useful details from the Jenkins Update Center are stored inside the database to run analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase, we worked on setting up the project and followed best practices while doing so.
The whole application is dockerized so that it is easier for anyone to spin up this project and test it out locally.
There's continuous integration (CI) in place for the project to make sure that new changes are tested automatically.
The useful details from the Jenkins Update Center are stored inside the database to run analysis.
```
same formatting suggestion

Author: Done, thanks!

=== Deliverables

* Create a spring boot project connected with a PostgreSQL DB (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/3[PR])
* Dockerize the whole application (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/7[PR])
* Setup continuous integration for the project (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/10[PR])
* Store plugin details from the update center, inside the DB in JSON format (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/18[PR])

=== Resources

* link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/milestone/1?closed=1[View Milestone 1]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 1: link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1t2vuNn1NFpDusnw0m4vdFw6WBQMeU6kccv_K1v2L6R0/edit#slide=id.g13dcaed2105_0_0[Slides]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 1: Demo and Presentation

video::loLSNdCv6K4[youtube,width=800,height=420,start=1089]

---

== Phase 2

> In this phase, the probe engine for the probes was designed. And processes like reading the update center and executing the probe engine are now running on a schedule without the need to restart the application. There are additions of useful probes running in the probe engine, which are getting listed on the UI to highlight the current state of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase, the probe engine for the probes was designed.
Processes like reading the update center and executing the probe engine are now running on a schedule, without the need to restart the application.
There are additional useful probes running in the probe engine, which are listed on the UI to highlight the current state of the project.
```
small wording suggestion, if I am misinterpreting the idea of the message, please let me know
otherwise, let me know if those make sense!

Author: Looks great, thanks for your suggestion!

Regarding,

> There are additional useful probes running in the probe engine...

As per my understanding, this sentence gives a sense that some additional probes were added on top of some already-existing probes. But that's not true, as there were no existing probes before these ones.

What do you think?

Reviewer: Thanks for sharing your insight!

In that case,  would "The creation of probes" or "Probes are created at this time" be an acceptable alternative instead? If there are no pre-existing probes, making that clear would be helpful in this case. However, if that doesn't make sense in terms of the actual process/function, then disregard my suggestion.

Author: Awesome!

Let's go with "Probes created at this time are getting run by the probe engine, and are listed on the UI to highlight the current state of the project." (Please correct if there are any grammatical errors)

Since this project was created from scratch and there was no mention of "probes" in Phase 1, I think we can go on without explicitly mentioning that there were no pre-existing probes before this.

=== Deliverables

* Design the Probe engine for the probes (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/19[PR])

> * Schedule the reading of the update center, and probe engine execution (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/20[PR#1] and link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/30[PR#2])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Schedule the reading of the update center and probe engine execution (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/20[PR#1] and link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/30[PR#2])
```
removing the "," would be okay here as it is not needed

Author: Done, thanks!

---

== Overview

. <<About Project>>
. <<Phase 1>>
. <<Phase 2>>
. <<Next Steps>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

---

== About Project

Plugin maintenance is an extremely important phase of a plugin’s lifecycle.
Jenkins is constantly developing, which raises a need for thousands of plugins to catch up with the latest developments. 
This allows them to stay useful for a broader set of users.

We aim to fulfill this need, by introducing a metric system to calculate the health score of Jenkins plugins. 
This health score measures the plugin’s development maturity level with the help of accurate numeric figures. 
This score attempts to provide an accurate picture of how much care and help a plugin needs, and makes it easier for contributors to contribute.
This score also allows users to make a conscious decision before installing or using a plugin.

There were two coding phases in the GSoC 2022.

---

== Phase 1

In this phase, we worked on setting up the project and followed best practices while doing so.
The whole application is dockerized so that it is easier for anyone to spin up this project and test it out locally.

> There's continuous integration (CI) in place for the project to make sure that new changes are tested automatically.

Author: Yes, since this was done during the GSoC phase, I agree that we should add it here (with credits) because from the project's perspective this was very crucial as well. I'll try to word it correctly in my next commit.

=== Resources

* link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/milestone/2?closed=1[View Milestone 2]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 2: link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1HOHRVFOfH07TnBfbGh3xAqakA3NfmKni_7FYyCx-llw/edit#slide=id.p[Slides]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 2: Demo and Presentation

video::fM2SMbppRxw[youtube,width=800,height=420,start=342]

* A BIG shoutout to my mentor link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/authors/jleon/[Jake Leon], for devoting his time to coaching me so well for both of these presentations.

---

== Next Steps

- Add more probes to the project.
- Generate the plugin health scores based on the data extracted by the probes.
- Deploy the health scores via a JSON file, similar to how Jenkins Update Center does it.
- Render the detailed report of the health score of each plugin by fetching the JSON data generated above.
- [Stretch Goal] Display Plugin health score on Plugin Manager.

---

== Acknowledgments

> * I'm extremely grateful to have been given this opportunity to contribute to the Jenkins project. I owe it to my mentors for being able to help take this project forward and learn lots of things along the way. Shoutout to link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/authors/alecharp[Adrien] and Jake. They invested tremendous time and energy in mentoring me and driving this project forward. They synced with me weekly and made sure that I was learning and that we were taking this project forward, 1 PR at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* I'm extremely grateful to have been given this opportunity to contribute to the Jenkins project. I owe it to my mentors for being able to help take this project forward and learn lots of things along the way. Shoutout to link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/authors/alecharp[Adrien Lecharpentier] and Jake Leon. They invested tremendous time and energy in mentoring me and driving this project forward. They synced with me weekly and made sure that I was learning and that we were taking this project forward, 1 PR at a time.
```
First occurence for Adrien, nice to get his full name at least once in this article. Added "Leon" to be similar in this phrase.

* I asked all kinds of questions about this project, and Jake’s been kind enough to answer all of them and help me understand this project and its future with his expertise. He had been kind enough to help me prepare for my presentations by offering so many tips on how to make effective slides and speak well. His coaching helped me put across my points more powerfully.

> * I also want to thank Adrien for being one of the best mentors I’ve ever had. The amount of time he spent moving this project forward and sharing his expertise with me is unparalleled. And for that, I’m deeply grateful to be mentored by him. It’s an absolute privilege to get this opportunity to learn from him.

Author: Thanks for catching this

> * Also, thanks to the org admins, Jean-Marc Meessen, Alyssa Tong, and Kris Stern, for always keeping me and other contributors on our toes and assisting us with any blockers and concerns by organizing weekly stand-up calls.

Author: I found Kris's author page on jenkins.io: https://www.jenkins.io/blog/authors/krisstern/ then I'll add this instead

> * Also, thanks to the org admins, Jean-Marc Meessen, Alyssa Tong, and Kris Stern, for always keeping me and other contributors on our toes and assisting us with any blockers and concerns by organizing weekly stand-up calls.

Reviewer 2: BTW, know that you can "add [multiple] suggestion[s] to batch" and do only one commit with all these suggestions if you want @dheerajodha

> * Also, thanks to the org admins, Jean-Marc Meessen, Alyssa Tong, and Kris Stern, for always keeping me and other contributors on our toes and assisting us with any blockers and concerns by organizing weekly stand-up calls.

Author: Ohhh! I just saw your message. I didn't know about this, I'll do it this way from now :+1:

> * Also, thanks to the org admins, Jean-Marc Meessen, Alyssa Tong, and Kris Stern, for always keeping me and other contributors on our toes and assisting us with any blockers and concerns by organizing weekly stand-up calls.

Reviewer 2: The way you've done with proper commits messages is great too!
Batching suggestion is good when they're similar, or if it's a small PR, separating commits atomically is more important IMO.

> * Also, thanks to the org admins, Jean-Marc Meessen, Alyssa Tong, and Kris Stern, for always keeping me and other contributors on our toes and assisting us with any blockers and concerns by organizing weekly stand-up calls.

Author: Noted. Yes, I had some similar commits like attaching author pages, and other ones for apostrophe-related changes, which could be grouped into their own batches.

=== Deliverables

* Create a spring boot project connected with a PostgreSQL DB (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/3[PR])
* Dockerize the whole application (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/7[PR])
* Setup continuous integration for the project (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/10[PR])
* Store plugin details from the update center, inside the DB in JSON format (link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/pull/18[PR])

=== Resources

* link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-health-scoring/milestone/1?closed=1[View Milestone 1]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 1: link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1t2vuNn1NFpDusnw0m4vdFw6WBQMeU6kccv_K1v2L6R0/edit#slide=id.g13dcaed2105_0_0[Slides]
* Jenkins Online Meetup Phase 1: Demo and Presentation

> video::loLSNdCv6K4?t=1089[youtube,width=800,height=420,start=3219]

Reviewer 3: The start time mentioned in the brackets seems to conflict with the intended point in the video. Also, mentioning the timestamp in the link is not necessary.
```suggestion
video::loLSNdCv6K4[youtube,width=800,height=420,start=1089]
```
